The direct detection of \acp{GW} promises to usher in a new era of astronomy.
The \ac{GW} spectrum represents an entirely new window on the universe,
independent of, and complimentary to, \ac{EM} radiation. Gravitational waves
can be used to directly probe objects unobservable by EM telescopes; e.g., the
properties of black holes, the equation of state of neutron stars, and the
state of the universe prior to the emission of the cosmic microwave background.
Joint GW and EM observations offer more possibilities, such as understanding
the progenitors of short-hard gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) and measuring the
expansion of the universe. The GW spectrum would also give us insight into the
physics of strong field gravity and numerical solutions of the Einstein
equations, as well as provide a test for alternative theories of gravity
\cite{SathyaSchutz:livingReveiw:2009}.

The U.S. \ac{LIGO} and the French-Italian Virgo interferometer are seeking to
make the first direct detections of gravitational waves \cite{Abbott:2007kv}.
To date, \ac{LIGO} has completed six \emph{Science runs}. The first five of
these runs were known as \emph{initial} \ac{LIGO}. In \ac{S5}, which lasted
from November 2005 to September 2007, the \ac{LIGO} detectors reached their
design sensitivity, as they were sensitive to gravitational waves with strain
amplitudes of $\sim10^{-21}$ in the $40-7000\,$Hz frequency band
\cite{Abbott:2007kv}. \ac{S6}, also known as \emph{enhanced} \ac{LIGO}
\cite{Adhikari:2006}, lasted from July 2009 until October 2010. Hardware
improvements were make to the detectors for \ac{S6}; during this period the
\ac{LIGO} detectors met and exceeded the sensitivity of \ac{S5}. Virgo has had
three science runs. \ac{VSR1} overlapped with \ac{S5}, lasting from May 2007
until Octover 2007 \cite{Acernese:2008zzf}. During this period, joint \ac{LIGO}
Virgo searches for \acp{GW} were carried out \cite{S5VSR1Burst, S5LowMassLV,
Collaboration:2009kk}. \ac{VSR2} and \ac{VSR3} ran from July 2009 until January
2010, and from August 2011 to October 2011, respectively. During these runs the
Virgo detector operated with improved sensitivity over \ac{VSR1}. \ac{LIGO},
having just completed \ac{S6}, is currently preparing for the Advanced
\ac{LIGO} era, which may begin as early as 2014 \cite{Harry:2010zz}. Virgo will
also be upgraded on the same schedule as Advanced \ac{LIGO}
\cite{Acernese:2008zzf}. For the Advanced era, both the \ac{LIGO} and Virgo
detectors are projected to have a factor of ten improvement in sensitivity
\cite{Harry:2010zz, PSD:AV}, which will allow for \ac{GW} detections from
multiple astrophysical sources \cite{Harry:2010zz, ratesdoc}.

During these Science runs, the \ac{LSC} and the Virgo Collaboration have
carried out several searches for \acp{GW} from various astrophysical sources.
These searches are broadly grouped into four categories \cite{Abbott:2007kv}:
\begin{itemize}

\item{{\it The \ac{CBC} group}: These searches look for \acp{GW} from compact
stellar mass binaries as they ``inspiral" into each other and merge
\cite{Belczynski:2002}. The waveform from these searches can be modelled and a
matched-filter analysis used \cite{Allen:2005fk}.}

\item{{\it The Burst group}: This consists of unmodelled transient searches
that look for \ac{GW} from systems that cannot easily be modelled, such as from
core-collapse supernovae \cite{Anderson:2000yy}.}

\item{{\it The Continuous-wave group}: This search looks for \acp{GW} from a
``continuous" wave soruce, such as a pulsar \cite{Collaboration:S5Pulsar}}

\item{{\it The Stochastic group}: This consists of searches for a ``stochastic
background" of broadband \acp{GW}, that, for example, could have been emitted
in the early universe \cite{Collaboration:S5stochastic}.}

\end{itemize} In this thesis we focus on the search for \acp{GW} from
\acp{CBC}. Within the \ac{CBC} group several different searches are performed.
Here, we focus on the \emph{all-sky ``low-mass" search}. This search looks for
gravitational waves from coalescing binaries that have a total total mass
$\mtotal < 35\,\Msun$ and a component mass $\mathrm{\geq 1M_\odot}$ using LIGO
and Virgo data.\footnote{Throughout the rest of this thesis we will refer to
this search as the \emph{low-mass \ac{CBC} search.}} This search includes
\ac{BNS}, \ac{BBH}, and \ac{NSBH}.

Coalescing compact binaries with a total mass $< 35\,\Msun$ have a number of
properties that make them promising candidates for detection by LIGO and Virgo
\cite{LIGOS1iul,LIGOS2iul,LIGOS2macho,
LIGOS2bbh,LIGOS3S4all,Collaboration:2009tt,Abbott:2009qj,S5LowMassLV}.  As the
binaries' components spiral into each other, they emit gravitational waves that
pass through the sensitive band of the LIGO and Virgo detectors.  These waves
can be well-modeled using the post-Newtonian approximation to General
Relativity \cite{Blanchet:1996pi,Droz:1999qx,Blanchet:2002av,
Buonanno:2006ui,Boyle:2007ft,Hannam:2007ik, pan:024014,Boyle:2009dg}.  Knowing
the morphology of the waveform provides a number of advantages, as it allows us
to use match filtering and signal-based vetoes \cite{Brown,Allen:2004}.  The
detectors have stationary, Gaussian noise that is intrinsic to the detector, as
well as non-Gaussian transients (\emph{glitches}) which come from environmental
and instrumental sources.  Match filtering is the optimal method to find weak
signals in the stationary noise since the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) grows
with the square root of the number of cycles
\cite{SathyaSchutz:livingReveiw:2009}. For non-Gaussian glitches, signal-based
vetoes provide a powerful way to separate noise from candidates
\cite{Allen:2004,Rodriguez:2007}.  Additionally, by utilizing all the detectors
in the LIGO-Virgo network, we can perform ``coincidence tests" to ensure that
triggers from different observatories are consistent \cite{Robinson:2008}.

In this thesis we detail how searches for ``low mass" \acp{CBC} are carried out
and we give some recent results from this search. In Chapter \ref{ch:theory} we
review the theory behind gravitational waves, showing how they arise in General
Relativity, and review the basics of the \ac{LIGO}/Virgo interferometers. In
Chapter \ref{ch:pipeline_principles} we review some of the principles of
matched filtering, and how various statistical tests are used to search the
data. Next, in Chapter \ref{ch:far}, we detail how false alarm rates are
calculated for \ac{GW} triggers. In Chapter \ref{ch:ihope_pipeline} we step
through the pipeline used to search for \acp{CBC}, which makes use of the
methods presented in Chapters \ref{ch:pipeline_principles} and \ref{ch:far}.
Chapter \ref{ch:s5_results} presents results from the low-mass \ac{CBC} search
for \acp{GW} in $6$ months of \ac{S5} data. Next, in Chapter
\ref{ch:s6_results}, we give a detailed examination of the low-mass \ac{CBC}
analysis of \ac{S6}, including tuning choices made and preliminary results from
that search. In Chapter \ref{ch:ligo_south_study} we present an analysis of the
\ac{S5} and \ac{S6} data that shows that we can detect \acp{GW} at expected
rates in Advanced \ac{LIGO}. Finally, in Chapter \ref{ch:future_developments}
we present some future directions for the low-mass \ac{CBC} pipeline.
