% ligo_south_study.tex

The \ac{LSC} currently plans to have three \ac{LIGO} detectors when Advanced
LIGO comes online: one interfermeter at Livingston, L1, and two at Hanford: H1
and H2. H2 is planned to have $4\,$km arms, instead of the $2\,$km length it
had in initial LIGO. However, in the past year the possibility opened up for a
\ac{LIGO} interferometer to be built in Australia. In this case, LIGO would
still have three interferometers; rather than have two at Hanford, the optics
for H2 would be shipped to the Australian site to be set up there.

\section{Advantages of LIGO South}

A number of studies were carried out to evaluate the pros and cons of having a
H1L1S1 (S1 for the Australian detector) network as opposed to a H1H2L1
network. Most of these studies found that the H1L1S1 network had a number of
advantages over the H1H2L1 network. Perhaps the biggest benefit is sources can
be better localized if the third detector is in the southern hemisphere. Since
the interferometers are not directional antennas, a network is needed to
localize a source. Essentially, by measuring the difference in time of arrival
between the various detectors in the network, we can triangulate the source.
The accuracy of localizing a source is given by \cite{Fairhurst2009,
wiki:ligoSth:localization}:
\begin{equation*}
p(\mathbf{r}|\mathbf{R}) \propto p(\mathbf{r})\exp\left[ -\frac{1}{2}(\mathbf{r} - \mathbf{R})^T \mathbf{M}(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{R})\right]
\end{equation*}
where $\mathbf{R}$ is the actual location, $\mathbf{r}$ is the reconstructed location, $p(\mathbf{r})$ is the prior distribution on $\mathbf{r}$, and $\mathbf{M}$ is given by:
\begin{equation*}
\mathbf{M} = \left[\sum \sigma_i^{-2}\right]^{-1} \sum_{i<j} \frac{\mathbf{D}_{ij}\mathbf{D}^T_{ij}}{\sigma^2_i \sigma^2_j}
\end{equation*}
Here, $\sigma_i$ is the timing accuracy in the $i\th$ detector and
$\mathbf{D}_{ij}$ is the distance between the $i\th$ and $j\th$ detectors.
Thus, the larger the distance between any two detectors, the more strongly
peaked the probability distribution will be around the actual location.

It was found \cite{wiki:ligoSth:localization} that in the H1L1S1 network, an
optimally located\footnote{In this case, ``optimally located" means that the
binary is overhead the plane formed by the network of detectors. The worst
localization occurs when the source is in the plane of the detectors. The
numbers presented are therefore best-case scenarios.} coalescing binary at \ac{SNR} 7
could be localized to an area of $8.5$ square degrees with $90\%$ probability.
In the H1H2L1 network the best localization was $12.5$ square degrees. If Virgo
is added to the network, then with H1L1S1V1 the localization can be as small as
$2.8$ square degrees with $90\%$ probability, whereas it is $10.0$ square
degrees with H1H2L1V1.

Another advantage of an Australian detector, as opposed to two detectors at
Hanford, is that a relative time-offset can be added between all of the
detectors to perform background estimation. Recall from Chapter
\ref{ch:s5_results} that in \ac{S5} we could not analyze H1H2-coincident time
due to correlated noise. Further, if there was some environmental factor that
caused one of the Hanford detectors to come out of Science mode, it would most
likely also cause the other Hanford detector to come out of Science mode. If we
instead have three non-co-located detectors, then we increase the probability
that at least two detectors will be operational at any given time, thereby
increasing our total observation time.

\section{Can We Detect at SNR 8 with Two Detectors?}

There were a number of clear advantages to moving the second Hanford detector
to Australia. However, one concern about doing this was the effect it would
have on the Advanced LIGO projected chronology. If the optics for the second
Hanford detector were shipped to Australia, it would likely take an additional
two or more years to bring the detector online. This means that we would only
have two detectors for the first few years of Advanced
\ac{LIGO}.\footnote{There is also the Virgo detector, but as Virgo is
maintained and funded by a different collaboration, they may not have the same
schedule as \ac{LIGO}. Thus, in this study we wanted to focus on what could be
accomplished using only the \ac{LIGO} detectors.} Our projected detection rates
are based on being able to detect gravitational waves from \acp{CBC} at an
\ac{SNR} of $8$ in each detector. We know that non-transient Gaussian noise, or
glitches, can affect our ability to detect, but this can be mitigated by
performing coincidence tests across detectors \cite{Robinson:2008}. If we only
have two detectors, can we confidently detect a \ac{GW} at \ac{SNR} $8$?

To answer this question we looked at the rates of H1L1 coincidences in \ac{S5}.
We used \ac{S5} as opposed to \ac{S6} because \ac{S6} the \ac{S5} analysis was
complete and triggers were available at the time of this study. All of the
months from the 12--18 month analysis were used, along with four months from
the \ac{S5}-LV analysis. All H1L1 coincidences were used in double-, triple-
and (in the case of the LV months) quadruple- coincident times. For H1H2L1,
H1L1V1, and H1H2L1V1 coincidences, the H1L1 part of the coincidence was used to
re-calculate the combined New \ac{SNR} of the trigger.

Figure \ref{fig:ligo_south-cat3_newsnr} shows the result of the analysis for
the low chirp-mass bin ($\mchirp < 3.48$). Plotted is the cumulative rate of
coincident zero-lag (``Foreground") and slide (``Background") triggers as a
function of combined New \ac{SNR}. The slide triggers were generated from the
standard 100-slide \ihope~analysis. The y-axis was generated in the same manner
as in the cumulative-rate plots in Figures \ref{fig:big_dog-cum_hist-extrap} --
\ref{fig:big_dog-rate_plot} of Chapter \ref{ch:s6_results}. Indeed, the plots
presented here were a predecessor to the cumulative-rate plots shown in Chapter
\ref{ch:s6_results}. The dashed-red line shows the combined new \ac{SNR} of a
signal with \ac{SNR} $8$ in each detector ($= 11.3$). Also plotted, as a yellow
star, is the combined new \ac{SNR} of a blind \ac{CBC} injection that was
performed during \ac{S5}.\footnote{Note: this is \emph{not} the blind injection
that was performed during \ac{S6}. At the time of this study, the \ac{S6} blind
injection had not happened yet. The \ac{S5} injection, which occurred during
\ac{S5}-LV analysis, was missed because it was performed when an earthquake was
passing Livingston, resulting in L1 being CAT3 vetoed during the time. For more
details on this blind injection, see \cite{S5LowMassLV}.}

It is evident from the plot that an event with a new \ac{SNR} of $8$ in each
detector would stand out above the background. In this case, we would place an
upper-limit on the \ac{FAR} as being $< 1$ in $50$ years. We can arrive at the
same conclusion from looking at Figure
\ref{fig:big_dog-cum_hist_no_littles-extrap_low} of Chapter
\ref{ch:s6_results}. (Recall that these plots were also created using only
H1L1-coincident triggers.) There we can use the extrapolation to estimate what
the \ac{FAR} would be for an signal with combined new \ac{SNR} of $11.3$. In
the low chirp-mass bin we would have a \ac{FAR} $\approx 1$ in $10^4$ years. 

\subsection{Deeper Study}

There are a few important features to this analysis. First, note that we have
shown results after CAT3 vetoes have been applied. Figure
\ref{fig:ligo_south-newsnr_cat2} shows the same plot as in Figure
\ref{fig:ligo_south-cat3_newsnr} after CAT2 vetoes have been applied. In this
plot we can see that an event at \ac{SNR} $8$ in each detector \emph{would not}
stand out above the background; it would only have a \ac{FAR} of $\sim1$ in $3$
years. This highlights the importance of \ac{DQ} investigations. Without good
data quality, we cannot detect at \ac{SNR} $8$ using two detectors.

Second, note that we have plotted results as a function of combined \emph{New}
\ac{SNR}. Figure \ref{fig:ligo_south-snr_cat3} shows the results after CAT3 as
a function of combined \ac{SNR}. The large tail due to non-Gaussian transients
has buried the \ac{SNR} 8/8 line in background; such an event would have a
\ac{FAR} of $\sim30$ per year if combined \ac{SNR} was our ranking statistic.
Clearly, without new \ac{SNR} we could not detect at \ac{SNR} $8$ (or $40$, for
that matter). However, when talking about real signals, we have interchanged
New \ac{SNR} and \ac{SNR}: we quote rates based on a \emph{\ac{SNR}} of $8$ in
each detector, yet we have placed the red-dashed line at a \emph{New \ac{SNR}}
of $8$ in each detector. The reason we can do this is New \ac{SNR} reduces to
\ac{SNR} for (well-modelled) \acp{GW}. Figure \ref{fig:ligo_south-newsnr_v_snr}
shows a plot of combined new \ac{SNR} versus combined \ac{SNR} for
(non-spinning) injections. The vertical dashed line shows the point at which
combined $\rho = 11.3$. At this point, we can see that most of the injections
have a combined New \ac{SNR} $> 11$. Note that some of the lower points are due
to glitches being mistakenly mapped to injections; cf. Figure
\ref{fig:ligo_south-inj_mchirp_accuracy}. Thus to detect with two detectors at
the quoted rates, we need New \ac{SNR}, which in-turn requires that we have
templates that match the \ac{GW} signal well.

Finally, note that we have so far only shown plots for the low chirp-mass bin.
The background does not fall off as sharply in the higher chirp-mass bins. This
can be seen by comparing Figure
\ref{fig:big_dog-cum_hist_no_littles-extrap_low} to Figure
\ref{fig:big_dog-cum_hist_no_littles-extrap_med}: the medium chirp-mass bin has
a higher tail, leading to larger \acp{FAR} at the same New \ac{SNR}. However,
as can be seen in the extended background with the blind injection removed (the
gray crosses) in Figure \ref{fig:big_dog-rate_plot}, we would still get a
\ac{FAR} of $~1$ in $3500$ years in the medium chirp-mass bin at a combined New
\ac{SNR} of $11.3$.  Though higher than the low chirp-mass bin, this \ac{FAR}
is still low enough to claim evidence for a detection. Further, we are most
concerned with the low chirp-mass bin, as this contains \ac{BNS} systems. As
discussed in section \ref{sec:astrophysics} the rate of \ac{BNS} coalescence in
the universe is the best determined, as it is based on astronomical
observations of \ac{BNS} systems \cite{ratesdoc}. We are therefore most
confident in quoted expected detection rates for \ac{BNS} coalescence; it is
for these systems that we wish to ensure that we can detect at \ac{SNR} 8.

\section{Conclusions}

This study showed that building \ac{LIGO} South would not hamper our abilities
to detect gravitational waves at the quoted rates in the near term. Thus the
decision of whether or not to build \ac{LIGO} South can be based solely on
practical aspects, such as whether Australia can commit the funds needed to
build the detector. Regardless of whether or not \ac{LIGO} South is built, this
study proved useful, as it gave us confidence that we can detect \acp{GW} at
expected rates in Advanced LIGO. Admittedly, we cannot be certain that the
character of the noise will be the same in Advanced LIGO. However, by comparing
the \ac{S5} cumulative rate plot in this chapter to the corresponding \ac{S6}
plots in Chapter \ref{ch:s6_results}, we see that we obtained largely the same
(better, even) background distribution in \ac{S6}, despite a number of hardware
differences between the runs. Thus, by making using of New \ac{SNR}, and with
equally successful \ac{DQ} studies in Advanced \ac{LIGO}, we can expect to
detect at a \ac{SNR} of $8$ in each detector.

\begin{figure}[p]
\center
\includegraphics[width=6in]{figures/ligo_south/Cat3-newsnr-low_mass.png}
\label{fig:ligo_south-cat3_newsnr}
\caption{Cumulative rate of H1L1 zero-lag (``Foreground") and slide
(``Background") coincidences in S5 after CAT3 (cumulative) vetoes have
been applied. Only triggers in the low chirp-mass bin ($\mchirp < 3.48\,\Msun$)
are shown. Data used is from all of the S5 12-18 months, plus four months
from the S5-LV analysis. The black line indicates the background; the blue
line indicates the foreground. As with the cumulative rate plots in Chapter
\ref{ch:s6_results}, the foreground rates are computed by dividing the
cumulative count of foreground triggers by the total zero-lag live time
($T_{\mathrm{f}}$). The background rates are computed by dividing the
cumulative count of background triggers by total slide live time
($T_{\mathrm{b}}$), which is equivalent to dividing by the effective number of
slides ($= T_{b}/T_{f}$), then dividing by the zero-lag live time. Hence the
black line is labelled as the ``Average Background." The red-dashed line
indicates the combined new SNR for an event with single-detector new
SNR of $8$ in each detector. The yellow star shows the combined new
SNR of a blind injection that was made during the S5-LV analysis.}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[p]
\center
\subfigure[After CAT2 vetoes applied.]{\label{fig:ligo_south-newsnr_cat2}\includegraphics[height=3.5in]{figures/ligo_south/Cat2-newsnr-low_mass.png}}
\subfigure[Cumulative rate vs. combined SNR, after CAT3 vetoes applied.]{\label{fig:ligo_south-snr_cat3}\includegraphics[height=3.5in]{figures/ligo_south/Cat3-snr-low_mass.png}}
\label{fig:ligo_south-cat2_and_snr}
\caption{Cumulative rate plot for the same period of time shown in Figure
\ref{fig:ligo_south-cat3_newsnr}, after CAT2 vetoes have been applied (top) and
as a function of combined SNR (bottom). In the bottom plot, CAT3 vetoes
have been applied.}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[p]
\center
\includegraphics[width=6in]{figures/ligo_south/H1L1-ligolw_cbc_plotfm_Non-Spinning_mathcalM_mathrminj_0_3_F1_BNSLININJ+BNSLOGINJ+NSBHLININJ+NSBHLOGINJ+BBHLININJ+BBHLOGINJ_PLOTTED-961545543-3628944.png}
\label{fig:ligo_south-newsnr_v_snr}
\caption{Combined New SNR versus combined SNR for non-spinning injections. All
injections were found as H1L1 coincidences. Results taken from $6$ weeks of S6D
data. The diagonal black-dashed line indicates $y=x$; the vertical dashed line
shows the point where combined SNR $= 11.3$. This plot was created by
\texttt{ligolw\_cbc\_plotfm}. As with all PlotFM plots, the blue stars indicate
injections found with $0$ FAR in their analysis period and colored circles
indicate injections with non-zero FAR.}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}[p]
\center
\includegraphics[width=6in]{figures/ligo_south/H1L1-ligolw_cbc_plotfm_Non-Spinning_frac_accuracy_mathcalM_mathrminjected_0_3_F3_BNSLININJ+BNSLOGINJ+NSBHLININJ+NSBHLOGINJ+BBHLININJ+BBHLOGINJ_PLOTTED-961545543-3628944.png}
\label{fig:ligo_south-inj_mchirp_accuracy}
\caption{Recovered chirp mass fractional accuracy of the injections shown in
Figure \ref{fig:ligo_south-newsnr_v_snr} as a function of combined SNR.
Triggers close to zero were most likely caused by injections. Triggers further
from the zero line are most likely glitches that happened to be within $\pm
1\,$s of the injection.}
\end{figure}
