Dear editor:

This is a report on manuscript DG11438, "Investigating the effect of
precession on searches for neutron-star -- black-hole binaries with
Advanced LIGO", by Ian Harry et al.

This paper describes the application of a new, geometric way of laying
out a template bank to post-Newtonian templates for NS-BH binaries
with aligned component spins. It also tests the ability of this
template bank to match signals from NS-BH binaries with arbitrary
precession.

I enjoyed reading the manuscript, which is generally well-written and
very thorough. I do have a number of concerns/suggestions, however,
which I describe below, split into three sections (General, Details,
and minor Textual comments).

===

General concerns:

G1. The paper's title mentions NS-BH binaries. However, in practice
the authors treat the case of two point particles (black holes), with
masses in the nominal NS and BH range. This should be made more clear
early on (abstract/introduction), and I'd like to see some discussion
of why the authors believe that the matter contents of the NS is
completely irrelevant (i.e., tidal coupling and dissipation, possible
pre-ISCO tidal disruption for some parameter values, etc.) -- or where
in their parameter space it might be relevant.

G2. The authors present results averaged over what they call "an
astrophysical distribution". However, while the range of parameters
(such as masses) is astrophysically justified, the distribution itself
is not -- e.g., there's certainly no evidence for supposing that NS
masses in NS-BH binaries are uniformly distributed between 1 and 3
solar masses. Statements that make averages over arbitrary and almost
certainly unphysical uniform distributions don't have much physical
relevance. Instead, it would be much more interesting to see
statements about what would happen if nature proved malicious -- i.e.,
what is the worst fitting factor for any of the signals that come from
the "astrophysically allowed" range?

G3. Partly in conjunction with G2, it would be very interesting to
know whether the spin of neutron stars is ever a concern. Averaging
over NS spins between -0.05 and 0.05 doesn't really answer this
question, but it seems that the authors already have all of the
information for providing an answer, e.g., by comparing the fitting
factor when the NS spin is set to 0 for an injection vs. NS spin set
to 0.05 (and "worst" choice of direction) with other parameters held
fixed.

G4. It seems that the worst performance typically happens at large BH
spin values and fairly extreme mass ratios (1:15). But at a 15:1 mass
ratio, and with significant spins, the system spends many cycles in
the strong field. Are pN waveforms valid at all in this regime? And if
we are outside the range of validity of the approximant, does it make
sense to worry about the quality of the construction of the template
bank? Perhaps searches in this regime require different waveforms
altogether (with a different bank, and if the waveforms are not pN,
it's not clear whether the geometric procedure for laying out the
template bank will apply at all)?

====

Details (in order of paper):

Introduction:

[Here and elsewhere:] One of the major results of this paper is that
the geometrical template placement algorithm requires ~20 percent
fewer templates than a stochastic bank. Why is having 20 percent more
templates a significant problem?

"Over a wide range of masses..." -- make clear that the number quoted
next to this is an average over a _uniform_ distribution of component
masses in this range (cf. G2 above).

"The range quoted ... is due to uncertainty in the waveform models..."
-- There's a much larger uncertainty in the range due to possible
variations in the choice of the distribution of injection parameters
[masses, spins, initial misalignments (e.g., see Gerosa et al.), etc.]

"We find there are regions in the NSBH parameter space where
precession effects cause a significant reduction..." -- can these
regions be succinctly described here?

Section II:

In discussion of BH mass distribution based on X-ray binary
measurements, results are quoted for low-mass X-ray only. When
high-mass X-ray binaries are included, the mean and standard deviation
of the Gaussian are increased, and the Gaussian becomes a very poor
fit (see Farr et al.). Also, the choice of mass ranges may require
additional discussion: assuming 3 solar masses as the minimum BH mass
ignores recent evidence for the mass gap, while the BH mass in IC 10
X-1 is likely to exceed 20 solar masses (cf. max of 15 assumed here).

NS spins discussion: When discussing recycling, it's worthwhile to
point out explicitly that, for NS-BH binaries, we expect the BH to
form first in the vast majority of cases, which would remove the
possibility of recycling. Regarding PSR J1748-2021B, whose mass
estimate extends to 3 solar masses (Freire et al., 2007), there's a
good warning in (Lattimer, 2013): "Inclinations are also unknown for
PSR J1748-2021B and PSR B1516+02B and are assumed to be random, but
this assumption is dangerous because the systems are not randomly
selected."

"The fastest spinning recycled neutron star observed in a BNS
binary..." -- J0737-3039A has a spin period of 23ms; the statement
that it has a dimensionless spin parameter of 0.05 is not consistent
with earlier statements that spin periods of 10 ms correspond to
dimensionless spin parameters of <0.04.

Section III:

For non-experts, make explicit the connection between the highest
terms in Eqs. (1) and (2) and pN order.

"We do not expect these terms to change the main conclusions of this
work as precession effects enter the phasing at lower PN order". --
Which order? Spin-orbit coupling is at 1.5 pN, but that's not
precession; in fact precession affects the amplitude and thus
introduces sidebands to the main waveform frequency at \pm orbital
precession frequency -- but that's not a lower-order phasing term per
se.

"It has empirically been found that TaylorR2F4 performs best..." --
what is the metric for "best" and how is this known?

Section IV:

"... use a lower frequency cutoff, f_min, of 15 Hz" -- is this too
close to the 14 Hz waveform start (spectral leakage)?

"... will not match it exactly due to the discreteness of the bank."
-- or differences in waveform families for h_s and the bank waveforms
h, right?

Discussion of effective fitting factor: the discussion starts with
directional and orientation dependence of the SNR. However, if
intrinsic parameters are held fixed, and only the extrinsic parameters
are varied, the effective fitting factor as defined is identical to
the fitting factor. Clarify the discussion, and make explicit what the
average is taken over.

Section V:

Could mention that the metric in Eq. (20) is the Fisher metric.

"Using these coordinates, the parameter space is globally flat." --
Presumably, this is true only for frequency domain waveforms, hence
the decision to use frequency-domain metrics to build template banks
even when the templates are in the time domain; if so, this could be
explained more clearly here (it is discussed somewhat later).

It's not very clear how xi are different from lambdas. It seems that
the components of g_{ij} are constant over the entire parameter space
by construction when the metric is computed in lambda coordinates, so
the parameter space is obviously flat. Of course, it can be rotated
into a frame where the metric is diagonal (and maybe that's what xi
refer to?), but either choice of rotation corresponds to a Euclidean
coordinate system, right? In any case, if doing PCA anyway, why not
just do it directly on the metric in lambda coordinates?

"With this method we can generally find a physical point that has the
desired match with the intended xi_i point." -- Is there a guarantee
that this will always be possible? If I put template in xi space (even
by "interpolating" between physical templates as you've done), some
might turn out to be completely unphysical, in which case there might
not be a sufficiently nearby physical solution.

"The cost of placing a bank using this method, however, is
negligible..." -- Unless the PSD changes, which would change the
metric, right? Given that detectors are not stationary over the long
term, this seems like an important practical limitation to discuss.

"We found that using an upper frequency cutoff that is higher than the
waveform's termination frequency results in overcoverage of that area
of the parameter space." Why does a cutoff higher than the termination
frequency make a difference -- surely, there's no contribution to the
overlap integral from beyond the waveform termination frequency
(unless the issue is that time-domain waveforms and the
frequency-domain waveforms used to lay out a bank have different
termination frequencies...)? Also, what is "that area" in this
sentence?

Section VI, last paragraph:

When comparing to A^*_n, the authors point out that A^*_n requires
more templates because it strictly demands a higher fitting factor; it
seems that a fair comparison would involve using a requirement on the
fitting factor that would yield similar fit distributions across the
parameter space.

The discussion of minimal matches here seems to imply that (1-minimal
matches) add, i.e., if family A has a minimal match of 0.99 vs. B, and
B has a minimal match of 0.99 vs. C, then A has a minimal match of
0.98 vs. C. In fact, the triangle inequality only guarantees that A
will have a minimal match of 0.96 against C in this case (see, e.g.,
Ohme, 2011).

Section VII:

"... some power is lost due to the difference in termination
frequencies, which is not predicted by the metric." -- Why not? (Cf.
last comment on Section V.)

Looking at figures like 5, I see very significant losses of fitting
factors on, say, the F2 vs. T4 plot. Given that these are, in
practice, estimates of the impact of higher-order (beyond 3.5 pN)
terms, which are different in these expansions, these are very telling
about how poorly we might do with our current knowledge of waveforms
if we are sufficiently unlucky to incorrectly guess what nature's
higher-order terms are. I.e., if we think that nature's higher-order
terms are as in Taylor T4, and, in fact, their values are those in
TaylorF2, it appears that we are in trouble regardless of precession
-- i.e., 3.5 pN is clearly not sufficient. Is this interpretation
correct? Regardless, it would be very instructive to comment on this.

Section VIII.A

You use the terms "mean fitting factor" and "signal recovery fraction"
-- might be good to remind the reader which of these is related to the
"effective fitting factor" defined earlier (the latter, I presume).

Fig. 6 caption: which waveforms are used (only the template bank is
mentioned in the caption).

Fig. 8 and others, and text: astrophysicists define the mass ratio q
as smaller component mass divided by larger component mass; your
definition is inverted relative to this standard.

Section VIII.B

"This is most prominent when the mass ratio and the BH spin magnitude
are large." -- I.e., where the BH spin angular momentum is
particularly large relative to the orbital angular momentum, right?
Also, see G4.

Fig. 11: change of scale on bottom left subplot relative to bottom
right and to Fig. 10 makes visual comparisons tricky.

Fig. 12 shows angles at 14 Hz. However, at sufficiently low
frequencies, the orbital angular momentum will always dominate over
the spin angular momenta and will be nearly aligned with the total
angular momentum. Thus, it would be more informative to make this plot
at the "bucket" frequency, around 100 Hz. Otherwise, it's not clear
why point where J dot L is nearly 1 (center top of plot) present
problems, since these look aligned. Meanwhile, the paucity of points
at the center of the plot (J perpendicular to both N and L) seems
surprising at first glance (shouldn't these be the one with the most
precession), but perhaps there are just very few simulations that fall
into this range at 14 Hz. Also, consider using color coding of points
to show actual fitting factors.

"In Fig. 14 we show the fractional increase in the number of recovered
signals..." -- please define the quantity being plotted explicitly.
Also (as you do mention later, cf. comment on conclusion below), this
only takes the SNR into account, but, in fact, successful recovery at
fixed FAP depends on more than just SNR. Might be worthwhile to
mention this here.

In discussion of [33], you point out that the signal recovery fraction
computed there was 0.86, while you found it to be 0.80. However,
there's no discussion of the reason for this discrepancy. What was
different in the calculations that might have caused this very
significant difference? In the absence of an explanation, is this a
reason to worry that one or both sets of results are in error? Also, I
don't find the 0.80 value in table II -- what exactly does this value
refer to?

In the discussion of [47], you state that you are in qualitative
agreement with that simpler model. How significant are the
quantitative differences? Should that simplified model be trusted/used
in the future?

Section IX:

"Therefore this should not have a large effect on the overall
sensitive volume of gravitational wave searches." -- I am not sure
this statement is justified. Consider a signal with SNR=12, which is
reduced to SNR=8 when the fitting factor is 0.67. This nominally
passes the detection threshold, but the remaining residual from the
incorrectly subtracted signal would have an SNR of greater than 8,
which could have a large chi-squared and might lead to a failure of
signal-consistency tests...

"... will require more template waveforms ... will mean that the SNR
of the loudest background triggers will increase." -- It's not the
number of templates that matters, but the region of the possible
signal space that they cover, right?

"... a factor of 10 increase in the number of independent templates
will only increase the expected SNR of the loudest background event by
less than 5 percent." -- Is this based on the Gaussian FAP assumption,
i.e., exp(-SNRnew^2 / 2) = 0.1 exp(-8^2 /2), so SNRnew ~ 8 * 1.04?
Perhaps this is worth clarification (or a reference if already
explained elsewhere).

====

Textual (in order of paper):

Abstract:

"The angular momentum of the black hole is expected to be comparable
to the orbital angular momentum." -- where? at ISCO?

Introduction:

"Stellar evolution predicts ..." -> "Population-synthesis models of
binary evolution predict..."

"In section II we describe the astrophysically motivated set of NSBH
*systems*"

"In section VIII we assess the performance of non-spinning template
banks" -- "non-spinning" is jargon, since these are really waveforms
corresponding to binaries with non-spinning components (and similarly
for spin-aligned and precessing templates); it may be useful to use
the jargon as an abbreviation, but if so, it should be introduced
explicitly.

Section III:

"... f is given by twice the orbital phasing frequency, *and* is
related..."

Section VII:

"In Fig. 4, we *repeat*..."

Sections VIII and IX:

"affect" -> "effect" when used as a noun (unless one is a
psychologist).

